fix: era focus and zkevm (#397)
matter-labs/zksync-docs: content/20.zksync-protocol/20.contracts/10.l1-contracts/10.l1-ecosystem-contracts.md

description:
---

Ethereum's future is rollup-centric. This means moving beyond isolated EVM chains toward an infrastructure centered around an ecosystem
of interconnected **ZKsync Chains**.

> These chains are independently deployed rollups or validiums built using the ZK Stack, and together they form a coordinated network secured by Ethereum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These chains are independently deployed rollups or validiums built using the ZKsync Stack, and together they form a coordinated network secured by Ethereum.
```

> To support this ecosystem, Ethereum requires shared Layer 1 smart contracts. This page outlines the ZK Stack’s approach to these contracts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support this ecosystem, Ethereum requires shared Layer 1 smart contracts. This page outlines the ZKsync Stack’s approach to these contracts:
```

the only role of which is to check whether the state transition proposed by the operator of the chain is correct.

To not commit to a specific type or option of this "state transition function”,
we’ll call each rollup a ZKsync Chain (note, that these can also be Validiums).

Since protocol upgrade v24 (May 2024), all ZKsync Chain contracts, including ZKsync Era diamond proxy, no longer directly manages any funds.
Instead, this responsibility transitions to the shared bridge.
This document describes technical details of ZK Stack contracts that make it possible for multiple chains to share liquidity,
and provide cost-effective communication among them.
Before delving into the details of ecosystem contracts, please familiarize yourself with the concept of

> [ZKsync Chain](/zksync-protocol/rollup) and read

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[ZKsync Chains](/zksync-protocol/rollup) and read
```

Ethereum changes, new bugs may be found in the original system
and so an instance that does not keep itself up-to-date with the upgrades may exploit some bug from the past and jeopardize the entire system.
Just deploying is not enough.
We need to constantly make sure that all ZKsync Chains are up to date
and maintain whatever other invariants are needed for these ZKsync Chains to trust each other.

Let’s define as *Chain Type Manager* (CTM) **as a contract that is responsible for the following:

- It serves as a factory to deploy ZKsync Chains
- It is responsible for ensuring that all the ZKsync Chains deployed by it are up-to-date.

Note, that this means that ZKsync Chains have a “weaker” governance.
I.e. governance can only do very limited number of things, such as setting the validator.

> ZKsync Chain governor can not set its own upgrades and it can only “execute” the upgrade that has already been prepared by the CTM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ZKsync Chain governor can not set its own upgrades and it can only “execute” the upgrade that has already been prepared by the CTM.
```

> In the long term vision ZKsync Chains deployment will be permissionless,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the long term vision ZKsync Chain deployment will be permissionless,
```

however CTM will always remain the main point of trust and will have to be explicitly whitelisted by the greater governance

> of the entire ZKsync Chain before its ZKsync Chain get the access to the shared liquidity.

Reviewer: This line sounds confusing

Author: fixed

### Configurability in the first release

For now, only one CTM will be supported — the one that deploys instances of ZKsync Chains, possibly using other DA layers.
The inner working of different DA layer support is not relevant for this documentation.

The exact process of deploying & registering a ZKsync Chain will be described in [sections below](#creating-new-chains-with-bridgehub).
Overall, each ZKsync Chain in the first release will have the following parameters:

| ZKsync Chain parameter | Updateability | Comment |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | chainId | Permanent | Permanent identifier of the ZKsync Chain. Due to wallet support reasons, for now chainId has to be small (48 bits). This is one of the reasons why for now we’ll deploy ZKsync Chain manually, to prevent ZKsync Chain having the same chainId as some another popular chain.  In the future it will be trustless-ly assigned as a random 32-byte value.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| chainId | Permanent | Permanent identifier of the ZKsync Chain. Due to wallet support reasons, for now chainId has to be small (48 bits). This is one of the reasons why for now we’ll deploy ZKsync Chains manually, to prevent ZKsync Chains from having the same chainId as some another popular chain.  In the future it will be trustless-ly assigned as a random 32-byte value.|
```

> | baseToken | Permanent | Each ZKsync Chain can have their own custom base token (i.e. token used for paying the fees). It is set once during creation and can never be changed. For now, each baseToken  has to be backed by the corresponding L1 tokens. The requirements for the baseToken  will be explored in the sections dedicated to SharedBridge. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| baseToken | Permanent | Each ZKsync Chain can have their own custom base token (i.e. token used for paying the fees). It is set once during creation and can never be changed. For now, each baseToken has to be backed by the corresponding L1 tokens. The requirements for the baseToken will be explored in the sections dedicated to SharedBridge. |
```

| baseTokenBridge | Permanent | The L1 shared bridge address. Used to transfer ETH from ERA chain to shared bridge, finalizing withdrawal and requesting an L2 transaction from the ERA chain |
| chainTypeManager | Permanent | The CTM that deployed the ZKsync Chain. In principle, it could be possible to migrate between CTMs (assuming both CTMs support that). However, in practice it may be very hard and as of now such functionality is not supported. |
| admin | By admin of ZKsync Chain | The governor of the ZKsync Chain has some limited powers to govern the chain |
| validatorTimelock | CTM | For now, we want all the chains to use the same 21h timelock period before their batches are finalized. Only CTM can update the address that can submit state transitions to the rollup (that is, the validatorTimelock).  |

> | validatorTimelock.validator | CTM | The governance of ZKsync Chain can choose who can submit new batches to the ValidatorTimelock.  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| validatorTimelock.validator | CTM | The governance of a ZKsync Chain can choose who can submit new batches to the ValidatorTimelock.  |
```

|  priorityTx Validation/ priorityTx FeeParams | CTM | For now, for the additional security only CTM can define the validation rules for L1→L2 transactions coming to the chain. |

> | executing upgrades | By governance of ZKsync Chain or CTM | While exclusively CTM governance can set the content of the upgrade, ZKsync Chain will typically be able to choose suitable time for them to actually execute it. In the first release, ZKsync Chain have to follow our upgrades.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| executing upgrades | By governance of a ZKsync Chain or CTM | While exclusively CTM governance can set the content of the upgrade, ZKsync Chains will typically be able to choose a suitable time for them to actually execute it. In the first release, ZKsync Chains have to follow our upgrades.|
```

In case we are aware that some of the committed batches on a ZKsync
Chain are dangerous to be executed, the CTM can call `revertBatches` on that ZKsync Chain.

### Issues & caveats

- If a ZKsync Chain skips an upgrade
  (i.e. it has version X, it did not upgrade to `X + 1` and now the latest protocol version is `X + 2` there is no built-in way to upgrade).
  This team will require manual intervention from us to upgrade.
- The upgrades of ZKsync Chains are not fully async as of now
  (i.e. either tight coordination or strict deadlines are required to ensure that every ZKsync Chain has time to commit their batches).
  This needs to be fixed in the future releases.
- The approach of calling `revertBatches` for malicious ZKsync Chains is not scalable (O(N) of the number of chains).
  The situation is very rare, so it is fine in the short term, but not in the long run.

## BridgeHub & Shared Bridge

In the previous section we discussed how ZKsync Chains and CTMs work.
However, these are just means to get the collection of chains that can trust each other,
while providing robust customize-ability for each individual chain.

> In this section we’ll explore how exactly unified liquidity is achieved and how do ZKsync Chains get deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section we’ll explore how exactly unified liquidity is achieved and how ZKsync Chains get deployed.
```

### Creating new chains with BridgeHub

The main contract of the whole ZKsync Chain ecosystem is called *`BridgeHub`*. It contains:

- the registry from chainId to CTMs that is responsible for that chainId
- the base token for each chainId.
- the whitelist of CTMs
- the whitelist of tokens allowed to be `baseTokens` of chains.

> In the long run, any `baseToken`  could be used (obviously at the peril of the ZKsync Chain that decides to use it).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the long run, any `baseToken` could be used (potentially at the peril of the ZKsync Chain that decides to use it).
```

### Creation of a chain in the first release

In the future, ZKsync Chain creation will be permissionless.
A securely random `chainId` will be generated for each chain to be registered.
However, generating 32-byte chainId is not feasible with the current SDK expectations on EVM and so for now chainId is of type `uint48`.
And so it has to be chosen by the governance of `BridgeHub`.
Also, for the first release we would want to avoid chains being able to choose their own initialization parameter to prevent possible malicious input.

> For this reason, there will be an entity called `admin` which is basically a hot key managed by us and it will be used to deploy new ZKsync Chains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this reason, there will be an entity called `admin` which is basically a hot key managed by the ZKsync team and it will be used to deploy new ZKsync Chains.
```

So the flow for deploying their own ZKsync Chain for users will be the following:

> 1. Users tell us (e.g. via a Google Form) that they want to deploy a ZKsync Chain with certain governance,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Users contact the ZKsync team (e.g. via a Google Form) about deploying a ZKsync Chain with certain governance,
```

    This step ensures that the baseToken will be backed 1-1 on L1.

2. After that, it just routes the corresponding call to the ZKsync Chain with the corresponding `chainId`.
  It is now the responsibility of the ZKsync Chain to validate that the transaction is correct and can be accepted by it.
  This validation includes, but not limited to:

    - The fact that the user paid enough funds for the transaction (basically `request.l2GasLimit * derivedL2GasPrice(...) + request.l2Value >= request.mintValue`.
    - The fact the transaction is always executable (the `request.l2GasLimit`  is not high enough).
    - etc.

> 3. After the ZKsync Chain validates the tx, it includes it into its priority queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. After the ZKsync Chain validates the tx, it's included into its priority queue.
```

The flow is expected to be the following:

- Once a ZKsync Chain is created, it will be the job of its first validator (it can be done any user with access to that ZKsync

>   Chain to deploy such a bridge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Chain) to deploy such a bridge.
```

#### Initialization in the first release

In the first release however, instead of providing such a proof permissionless-ly on L1,
the ZKsync Chain owner will have to send a message to us, we will double-check that the deployed bytecode is correct and initialized properly.
Once it is done, our governance will call the `initializeChainGovernance` function on the `SharedBridge` to make a chain as initialized.

### Shared bridge as standard ERC20 bridge

`SharedBridge` does not only serve as store for base tokens.

> It is also de-facto ZKsync Chain implementation of the ZKsync ERC20 token

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also the de-facto ZKsync Chain implementation of the ZKsync ERC20 token
```

[default bridge](/zksync-protocol/rollup/bridging-assets),
i.e. the bridge that allows users to bridge ERC20 assets to the L2.
The bridged assets will have “standard” ERC20 token implementation, i.e. fee-on-transfer,
rebase or other sort of custom token functionality will not be supported for bridged assets.

> For better understanding of this section it is recommended to understand (at least roughly) [how bridging on ZKsync Chains works](/zksync-protocol/rollup/bridging-assets).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a better understanding of this section it is recommended to read about [how bridging on ZKsync Chains works](/zksync-protocol/rollup/bridging-assets).
```

- `secondBridgeAddress` is the address of the bridge which is responsible for the asset being deposited. In this case it should be the same `SharedBridge`
- `secondBridgeValue`  is the `msg.value` to be sent to the bridge which is responsible for the asset being deposited
  (in this case it is `SharedBridge`).

>   This can be used to deposit ETH to ZKsync Chains that have base token that is not ETH.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This can be used to deposit ETH to ZKsync Chains that have a base token that is not ETH.
```

All of the above describes how the shared bridge & bridge hub will work in the end.
However, how do we make sure that the users’ interfaces don't break?

> ZKsync Era was the first chain to migrate to the shared bridge and bridge hub and the following steps were required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ZKsync Era was the first chain to migrate to the shared bridge and BridgeHub. The following steps were required.
```
